review ch3 (#547)
worldbank/dime-data-handbook: chapters/3-measurement.tex

you have all data that you need
to answer the research questions in your research design,
well before starting the analysis process described in Chapter 6.
It is also useful documentation for the project.
The process of drafting the data map is a useful
opportunity for principal investigators
to communicate their vision of the data structure and requirements,
and for research assistants to communicate
their understanding of that vision.
Our recommended best practice is that
the data map is completed before any data is acquired and
that it is made a part of the pre-registration of the study.

> However, in practice many research projects evolves

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in practice many research projects evolve
```

as new data sources, observations, and research questions arise,

> and then it is important that each component is maintained and updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then it is important that each component of the Data Map is continuously maintained and updated.
```

This is not identical to dependent and independent variables in a regression.
For example, research design variables such as treatment status are often not 
as uncorrelated with real world attributes 
as the assumptions in our statistical models say that they have to be. 
One common mitigation of that is to add control variables 
as additional independent variables in the regressions.
This helps isolate the relationship between the treatment status and the outcome variable studied. 
In this example, both the outcome variable (dependent variable) and 
most control variables (independent variables) 
are measurement variables that are not direct expressions of research design.
It is this direct linkage between your theoretical research design 
to real world characteristics that is the definition of a research variable.
If you are a PhD economist with several years of experience 
then this distinction might seem unnecessary to you 
as this relation is very intuitive for you. 
However, your research project is likely to depend on contributions 
from someone to whom this is not as intuitive.
We believe this distinction is helpful for them, 

> and to maintain this distinction they are handled differently in the data map.

Reviewer: I don't understand this paragraph well what is being siad in this paragraph. I think it's meant to be a response to David Mckenzie's question about whether by research design and measurement variables we actually mean LHS and RHS variables. I think we can address that by more clearly clarifying in the description (and by renaming as you've done), and then being careful how we use them in explanations throughout. I would suggest to drop this, or at least to significantly revise (i didn't understand well enough to suggest specific revisions).

Examples of such activities are data collection, data analysis,
random sampling, and treatment assignment.\index{master dataset}
The master dataset should be the authoritative source of
all research design variables\index{research design variables}
but not include any measurement variables.
Research design variables and measurement variables
often come from the same source,
but should not be stored in the same way.
For example, if you acquire administrative data that both includes
information on eligibility for the study (research design variables)
and data on the topic of your study (measurement variables)
you should first decide which variables are research design variables,
and store them in the master dataset,
while storing the measurement variables in a cleaned dataset
as described in Chapter 5.
This distinction is made as variables that 
describes your research design applies across your project,
but measurement variables is a snapshot 

> that describe the point of time they were observed in.

Reviewer: David commented that " I also found it odd to think of treatment take-up as part of this – sometimes treatment take-up is time-varying". That's a fair point. I don't think we necessarily want to say that design variables are time invariant, nor that measurement variables are a snapshot; they can measure time-invariant characteristics. I think the distinctions we drew earlier between the two types of variables are clearer and sufficient. I've removed this in my edits but we can discuss.

It is common that you will have to update

> your master datasets throughout your project.

Reviewer: Should it be necessary to update them throughout? can you provide an example here of when that would be necessary? the most common case i can think of is when you receive new data, but if you've really planned out all data sources from the beginning as we are recommending it seems that wouldn't be necessary.

Author: ok, and another example would be that you learn something mid-project that makes you want to do some additional research as well or that a PI has a new idea mid-project that they want to also test. And this can have new requirements on all three components in the data map. It would be great if everything could be foreseen at the beginning of the project, but in reality that is not the case.

the operations used to combine datasets did not create unwanted duplicates
or incorrectly drop any observations.

The information that goes into the data flowcharts can be expressed in text,
but our experience is that diagrams are the most efficient way to communicate this information across a team.
A data flowchart can be created in a flowchart drawing tool
(there are many free alternatives online) or

> by Microsoft shapes or smartart.

Author: ```suggestion
by Microsoft PowerPoint shapes or smartart.
```
Some word is missing right? Or what is "Microsoft shapes"?

Reviewer: there are shapes and smartart in word as well as powerpoint which is why i hadn't specified; doing this in a word doc seems equally fine as ppt. how about: "by using the shapes or SmartArt tools in Microsoft Office."

Author: ```suggestion
by using the shapes or SmartArt tools in, for example, Microsoft Office.
```
I like this the best. I added "for example" as we are not specifically recommending it. There are alternatives to office and we are just suggesting the is a an example.

\section{Research designs and data map needs}

An important step in translating the research design to specific data
structure is to determine which research design variables you will need in the data analysis
to infer what differences in measurement variables
are attributable to your research design.\index{research design variables}
These data needs should be expressed in your data map by

> listing the data sources where these variables will come from in the data linkage table,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
listing the data source for each variable in the data linkage table,
```

by adding columns for them in your master dataset

> (the master dataset might not have any observations yet),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(the master dataset might not have any observations yet; that is not a problem),
```

> and by including in your data flowcharts how they will be merged to the analysis data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and by indicating in your data flowcharts how they will be merged to the analysis data.
```

such as panel datasets like ``person-year'' structures
and multi-level data like ``district-school-teacher-student'' structures.

\section{Research designs and data map needs}

After you have made the first draft of your data map,
you need to carefully think about your research design
and decide which research design variables you will need in the data analysis
to infer the relation between differences in measurement variables

> and your research design.\index{research design variables}

Reviewer: i wonder about the sequencing here. to me this seems like it should come before or at least be part of the process of creating a data map; part of the understanding of how you set up your data. in practice i think all i suggest changing is to say "When drafting your data map, you need to ..." instead of "After you have made the first draft of your data map, you need to ..."

Author: I think a project team should cover the content in these two sections at the same time, but in the book it is separate sections. Similarly to data visualization, we talk about it during research outputs but it can be used already from the data cleaning stage. 

I like your suggestion, and if you think that is sufficient, then I am happy to just accept that.

Reviewer: Yep, i think just changing the wording as i suggested is sufficient.

Author: I am done quickly going over your edits. You went for a third option in your edits. I think what you committed also works.

The intuition is that if everyone in the eligible population
is assigned at random to either the treatment or control group,
then the two groups will, on average, be statistically indistinguishable.

> Randomization makes it possible to obtain an unbiased estimate of 
> the effects that can be attributed to a specific program or intervention.\sidenote{\citet{duflo2007using}, {JPAL\_RCT}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Randomization makes it generally possible to obtain unbiased estimates of 
the effects that can be attributed to a specific program or intervention:
in a randomized trial, the expected spurious correlation between treatment and outcomes 
will approach zero as the sample size increases.\sidenote{\citet{duflo2007using}, \citet{JPALRCT}}
```

Fixed citation call and added clarity on function of randomization here

might not be aware that their actions are the implementation of a research design.

Therefore, you must acquire monitoring data that
tells you how well the realized treatment implementation in the field
corresponds to your intended treatment assignment,
for nearly all experimental research designs.
While monitoring data has traditionally been collected by sending someone to the field ,
it is increasingly common to collect monitoring data remotely.
Some examples of remote monitoring include:
local collaborators uploading geotagged images for visible interventions (such as physical infrastructure),
installing sensors to broadcast measurements (such as air pollution or waterflow),
distributing wearable devices to track location or physical activity (such as fitbits),
or applying image recognition to satellite data.

> In-person monitor activities are often preferred but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In-person monitoring activities are often preferred but
```

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\subsection{Doing power calculations for research design}

% sampling error, randomization noise and the need for power calcs
Random sampling and treatment assignment are noisy processes:
it is impossible to predict the result in advance.
By design, we know that the exact choice of sample or treatment
will be uncorrelated with our key outcomes,
but this lack of correlation is only true ``in expectation'' --

> that is, the correlation goes to zero as the sample size goes to inifinity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that is, the noise component of the correlation between randomization and outcome 
will only be zero on average across a large number of randomized trials.
```

Reviewer 2: this part is about expectation over experiments, not the sample size of a single experiment
